# Product Context

## Introduction

This purpose of this document is to explore and cover all legal, ethical and health and safety concerns that were involved in the creation of this project and what issues could arise from its use after the project has been launched. 

# Legal

There are many components used in the creation and operation of our autonomous guide dog, this means that we must ensure that we are following all legal policies at all times such as adhering to intellectual property laws, fair use acts and data protection acts.

We used software-based tools during the development of our project with the appropriate licenses that were provided by the University of Essex. For example, we used software such as Arduino IDE and SOLIDWORKS when developing the code and 3D models of our product. These applications were acquired as fully licensed downloads from the University or were able to be downloaded free of charge from their manufacturer’s website. It is worth noting that we used the libraries that came with Arduino IDE 1 which are covered under the GNU General Public License. We did however have to use a third-party Arduino library that allowed us to program a Raspberry Pi Pico H as if it were a generic Arduino board. This library is hosted on GitHub and is again covered for use under the GNU Lesser General Public License.

A major legal issue is the use of third-party data and information that has or will be used in the final product. Although the product is self-navigating around its environment, in order to be able to navigate a visually impaired user from their starting point to their destination, the device will need some sort of input to be able to generate a route and then safely get the user there. There is a mobile phone application in development that takes data from third-party services such as Apple Maps or Google Maps and generates the best route to that destination.

Both Google and Apple Maps have an API that is available for usage and implementation on both Web applications and mobile applications. Although we are able to use them for our project, it is not without a catch. For Google Maps, we are able to use their in-house API for free until we reach the limit of $200 of free credit per month which is the equivalent of approximately 28,500 map search requests per month. Apple also has a similar pricing model and is included in an Apple Developer Subscription until we reach their daily quota of 25,000 calls.

As we are dealing with data that the user can upload to third party services through our device and application, we must ensure that all data stored or communicated remains compliant with all data protection acts and privacy laws such as the 2018 General Data Protection Regulation. The basic seven principles of the GDPR Act state that the data must be used in a lawful, fair, and transparent way. The users of our service will have to consent to their location data being shared with services such as Apple and Google Maps. Data must be minimalised meaning that we only collect information that we need from the user and that is relevant for the services provided. The third principle of GDPR states that data must be accurate. For our application, this means keeping an accurate record of the places that the user frequents such as their home, work, or school address. If addresses change, we delete the old data and add a new record. This will be done automatically in our third-party application API's such as Google Maps. We must also adhere to the fifth principle which is storage limitation that states that data must only be kept for as long as we need it and that it should be anonymous. The sixth principle states that data must be kept confidential and secure. This means all data on our application must travel over encrypted channels and not be decrypted or stored where it could be accessed without proper authorization. The seventh and final principle states that we must hold ourselves accountable should or product or service break any one of these principles.

# Ethical

The largest ethical issue surrounding our project is what could happen once our product or products like it become popular enough to become widely adopted and replace the traditional guide dog. Typically, guide dogs are in service for around 9 to 11 years before they retire, according to Guide Dogs.org. Once they are no longer needed, they stay with their family as a pet rather than a service dog or in some cases when this is no longer possible, they are fostered and rehomed. It is a growing concern that if this product succeeds, there could be mass guide dog retirement, leading to problems of rehoming and caring for the guide dogs until they are rehomed.

# Health and Safety

One of the most important factors in the use of our product is the health and safety of our project team and end users. Our device is planned to be a complete replacement for a traditional guide dog and with this comes risks as our device alone will be responsible for keeping vulnerable people safe while moving around complex environments. There are also the risks associated with the materials the device is made from and risks surrounding the impact on other people, not just the user.

### User Safety

The first health and safety issue are the need to keep our end users safe from harm whilst using the device. The guide dog needs to be able to assist and direct a vulnerable person around a complex and potentially dangerous environment. Our product needs to be able to operate near roads with traffic, near steps and elevated walkways and near other obstacles. In order to accomplish its goal safely, the MAX guide dog is fitted with multiple sensors that track everything from obstacle detection and avoidance, humidity sensors that can detect if the device is moving near water and vibration sensors that can inform the user that they are about to walk on tactile pavement near a road crossing or if the ground is uneven and poses a risk to the user. 

We have also implemented many other features to provide feedback through both audible cues and haptic vibration feedback so that even users with visual impairments may still operate the device safely. A small buzzer is attached to the underside of the device that plays two tones – the first tone is a simple 800Hz tone that repeatedly plays as the device is reversing. This is useful for when the device has detected an object directly ahead and must reverse before navigation can continue. This tone alerts the user that the device will be moving backwards and to be careful. The second tone is an emergency tone that plays in the range of 600Hz to 1200Hz and mimics the sound of a police siren. This tone is played during an emergency situation such as the device being stuck, falling over or if the emergency button has been pressed.

The final feature we have implemented is a simple emergency stop button that is accessible via the handle for the device. It is a momentary switch that will stay in position until it is pressed again. This puts the device into an emergency state where it will not move and plays a tone to alert the user and other people to the device’s presence.

### The Safety of Others

As this device is planned to be used in public spaces such as streets, cities, shops and parks, there is an inherent risk to not just the user who is operating the device but also people in close proximity to the device. The device could, in the event of a malfunction, become stuck in a movement state or not detect obstacles which are other people. This could lead to other people being struck with the device or not noticing its small presence, even falling or tripping over the device.
To mitigate the risks posed to members of the public, we have covered the device in a protective shell so that bare components are not exposed which greatly reduces the risk of the device malfunctioning. We have also implemented a small emergency stop button on the handle that when pressed by the user, plays a loud tone to alert surrounding people of the device’s presence.

# Equality, diversity, and inclusion statement

The MAX guide dog project has been developed with equality and diversity in mind. It is the goal of Essex Universities Team Project Challenge (CE201) Module to bring students from different backgrounds together to create a product. In our team, each member was treated as an equal and all ideas brought up during the weekly lab sprints and scrum meetings were taken seriously and, in some cases, implemented into the final version of the product. All users worked on the project in many ways including the conception of the project, the design and assembly and creation of the documentation. I believe that in our team, our diversity was what allowed this project to be so extensive and exciting to work on. Our team is comprised of multiple students from around the world who all have different academic backgrounds. This mean that the project team had an extensive set of skills ranging from Mechatronics, Programming, 3D Design, Robotics and Electronic Engineering. All of these skills were combined to create the final product.
